PNAS PLUS

Mechanistic insights into c-di-GMP–dependent
control of the biofilm regulator FleQ from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Bruno Y. Matsuyamaa,1, Petya V. Krastevab,c,1, Claudine Baraquetd, Caroline S. Harwoodd,2, Holger Sondermannc,2,
and Marcos V. A. S. Navarroa,2
a

Departamento de Física e Ciência Interdisciplinar, Instituto de Física de São Carlos, Universidade de São Paulo, São Carlos 13563-120, SP, Brazil;
Department of Structural Biology and Chemistry, Unité G5 Biologie Structurale de la Sécrétion Bactérienne and UMR 3528, CNRS, Institut Pasteur,
75015 Paris, France; cDepartment of Molecular Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853; and dDepartment of
Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
b

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Bacterial biofilm formation during chronic infections confers increased fitness, antibiotic tolerance, and cytotoxicity. In many
pathogens, the transition from a planktonic lifestyle to collaborative, sessile biofilms represents a regulated process orchestrated
by the intracellular second-messenger c-di-GMP. A main effector
for c-di-GMP signaling in the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the transcription regulator FleQ. FleQ is a bacterial enhancer-binding protein (bEBP) with a central AAA+ ATPase
σ54-interaction domain, flanked by a C-terminal helix-turn-helix
DNA-binding motif and a divergent N-terminal receiver domain.
Together with a second ATPase, FleN, FleQ regulates the expression
of flagellar and exopolysaccharide biosynthesis genes in response to
cellular c-di-GMP. Here we report structural and functional data that
reveal an unexpected mode of c-di-GMP recognition that is associated with major conformational rearrangements in FleQ. Crystal
structures of FleQ’s AAA+ ATPase domain in its apo-state or bound
to ADP or ATP-γ-S show conformations reminiscent of the activated
ring-shaped assemblies of other bEBPs. As revealed by the structure
of c-di-GMP–complexed FleQ, the second messenger interacts with
the AAA+ ATPase domain at a site distinct from the ATP binding
pocket. c-di-GMP interaction leads to active site obstruction, hexameric ring destabilization, and discrete quaternary structure transitions. Solution and cell-based studies confirm coupling of the
ATPase active site and c-di-GMP binding, as well as the functional
significance of crystallographic interprotomer interfaces. Taken together, our data offer unprecedented insight into conserved regulatory mechanisms of gene expression under direct c-di-GMP control
via FleQ and FleQ-like bEBPs.
enhancer binding protein

and exopolysaccharide (EPS) secretion to mediate the transition
between planktonic and biofilm lifestyles (12–14). FleQ contains
an N-terminal REC receiver domain (Pa_FleQREC), a central
AAA+ ATPase σ54-interaction domain (Pa_FleQAAA), and a
C-terminal helix-turn-helix DNA binding motif (Pa_FleQHTH)
(Fig. 1A). FleQ shares significant homology and similarities in
gene-expression regulation with members of the NtrC subfamily of
bacterial enhancer binding proteins (bEBPs) (15).
Typically, bEBP with REC domains are regulated by phosphorylation via cognate histidine kinases, whereby transfer of a
phosphoryl group from the kinase to the REC domain alters
molecular interactions within or between bEBPs (16, 17). As a
result, phosphorylated bEBPs, reorganized into ring-shape hexamers, bind ∼150 bp upstream of the transcription start site,
recruit the σ54-RNAP–promoter complex, and initiate transcription in an ATPase-dependent manner (18–20). Despite
similar domain architecture, however, FleQ appears to use a
drastically different mechanism of regulation (13, 14, 21). FleQ
Significance
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen that can
cause fatal chronic infections, relies on the intracellular secondmessenger c-di-GMP to form robust multicellular biofilms during
host tissue colonization. c-di-GMP is sensed directly by the
transcription regulator FleQ, which inversely regulates flagellar
motility and exopolysaccharide secretion to secure a planktonic
to sessile life-form transition. FleQ belongs to the diverse family
of AAA+ ATPase enhancer-binding proteins, but how its noncanonical function on transcriptional regulation is controlled by
c-di-GMP remains enigmatic. Here, we report structural and
functional data that identify an unusual mode of c-di-GMP
recognition accompanied by a major quaternary structure reorganization. Our analyses offer a consensus to previous studies
and unique insights into the mechanism of action of FleQ and
FleQ-like proteins.

| flagella | structure | gene expression

B

acterial adaptations to diverse environments, including human hosts, involve collaborative group behaviors, such as
quorum sensing, swarming, and biofilm formation (1–5). In
general, quorum-sensing during host tissue colonization is associated with virulence gene expression and acute-phase infections,
whereas biofilm formation facilitates the development of chronic
infections, evasion of host immune response, and increased tolerance to treatments (6). It is now well appreciated that these
social behaviors result from highly regulated signal transduction
processes, which in many bacteria are choreographed by the
nucleotide-based second messenger c-di-GMP (7–9). Synthesized by GGDEF domain-containing diguanylate cyclases and
hydrolyzed by EAL or HD-GYP domain-containing phosphodiesterases, c-di-GMP is sensed by a variety of protein- and
RNA-based effectors to exert control at transcriptional, translational, and posttranslational levels (10, 11).
In Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen that
causes severe chronic infections in cystic fibrosis patients, burn
victims, and other immunocompromised individuals, the transcription factor FleQ acts as a master regulator of flagellar motility

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523148113

Author contributions: B.Y.M., P.V.K., C.B., C.S.H., H.S., and M.V.A.S.N. designed research;
B.Y.M., P.V.K., C.B., and M.V.A.S.N. performed research; B.Y.M., P.V.K., C.B., C.S.H., H.S.,
and M.V.A.S.N. analyzed data; and P.V.K., H.S., and M.V.A.S.N. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: M.B., Imperial College London; and A.M.S., Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: The atomic coordinates have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank,
www.pdb.org (PDB ID codes 5EXP, 5EXS, 5EXT, and 5EXX).
1

B.Y.M. and P.V.K. contributed equally to this work.

2

To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: csh5@uw.edu, hs293@cornell.edu,
or mvasnavarro@ifsc.usp.br.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1523148113/-/DCSupplemental.

PNAS | Published online December 28, 2015 | E209–E218

MICROBIOLOGY

Contributed by Caroline S. Harwood, November 24, 2015 (sent for review September 29, 2015; reviewed by Martin Buck and Ann M. Stock)

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Fig. 1. Crystal structures of P. aeruginosa FleQ AAA+ domain reveal ring-shaped, hexameric assemblies. (A) Domain organization of FleQ. AAA+ functional
motifs and bEBPs specific features discussed in the text are labeled. Full-length P. aeruginosa FleQ (Pa_FleQFull) and domain construct boundaries (Pa_FleQAAA
and Pa_FleQAAA-HTH) used in this work are indicated. (B) Structure of an ATP-γ-S-bound Pa_FleQAAA protomer. Coloring of structural elements and AAA+
subdomains SD1 and SD2 is consistent with the diagram shown in A. (C) Superimposition of apo (gray), ADP-bound (pink), and ATP-γ-S-bound (orange) crystal
structures. Red and brown dashed lines highlight interactions between FleQ residues and ADP or ATP-γ-S, respectively. (D) Crystallographic apo-Pa_FleQAAA
hexamer assembly as viewed down the 65 fold axis. Symmetry generated protomers are colored in black. Walker A motif and σ54-interacting loops L1 and L2
are shown in blue, magenta and cyan, respectively. (Right) An extended view of the crystal lattice in an orthogonal view. Intercalated black and white “open”
hexamers appear as helical Pa_FleQAAA filaments running along the screw axis through the entire crystals.

lacks both a cognate sensor kinase and conserved REC domain
residues that are crucial for phosphotransfer and phosphorylation-dependent conformational changes. Instead of relying on
covalent modifications, its function depends on direct protein–
protein interactions with FleN, a distinct ATPase that acts largely
as a FleQ antagonist (22). Furthermore, at promoters of the flagellar biosynthesis gene cluster, FleQ not only binds to enhancer
sequences upstream of the transcription start site—like classic
E210 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523148113

bEBPs—but also at sites downstream from the transcription start
sites (13, 23). In addition, and most relevant for this study, c-diGMP directly binds to and regulates FleQ, altering target promoter activity (13, 14, 21).
C-di-GMP exerts distinct effects on FleQ’s regulatory roles at
the flagellar and EPS biosynthesis operons, underscoring the system’s multifaceted role in biofilm formation (21). The dinucleotide dampens FleQ’s ATPase activity and causes a modest but
Matsuyama et al.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Results
Canonical, Ring-Shaped FleQ Hexamers Revealed by Crystal Structures of
Its AAA+ Domain. The AAA+ ATPase domain of bEBPs couples

ATP binding and hydrolysis to transcription complex remodeling
(18). All bEBPs’ functional features, including the specific σ54interaction loops—L1, which contains the signature GAFTGA
motif (27), and L2—are conserved in FleQ (Fig. 1A). Purified,
nucleotide-free Pa_FleQAAA (residues 137–394) crystallized in
space group P65 and its structure was determined to 1.8 Å resolution
by single-wavelength anomalous dispersion (SAD) phasing on iodidederivatized crystals. Using the apo-structure as the search model,
structures of Pa_FleQAAA cocrystallized with ADP or ATP-γ-S were
solved by molecular replacement and refined to a resolution of
2.4 Å and 2.5 Å, respectively (Table S1). In these structures,
Pa_FleQAAA adopts a canonical bilobal fold comprising a larger
N-terminal α/β subdomain typical for P-loop NTPases (SD1) and
an α-helical subdomain specific for AAA+ ATPases (SD2) (Fig.
1B) (20, 28). Apart from subtle changes caused by nucleotide
coordination, the apo- and nucleotide-bound structures are
virtually identical, with an all-atom rmsd lower than 0.6 Å
in pairwise superpositions of protomers. Both ADP and ATPγ-S interact with residues S176 and K180 from Walker A
(G174xxGxGKE), as well as with a conserved R363 from the so-called
sensor II motif in subdomain SD2 (Fig. 1C and Fig. S1D) (28).
Ribose sugar moieties are additionally coordinated by the SD2
residue R334. In the ATP-γ-S–bound form, the γ-phosphate of the
nucleotide is sensed by D245 and, indirectly, by E246 from the
Walker B motif (T241LFLDE) (Fig. 1C and Fig. S1A).
Although the asymmetric units of all three structures contain a
single polypeptide chain, a view along the sixfold symmetry axes
reveals protomer packing similar to the hexameric rings of activated canonical AAA+ proteins (Fig. 1D) (28). Rather than
forming discrete oligomers, however, the protomers arrange in
continuous spirals along the screw axes (Fig. 1D, Right). Interestingly, similar spiral arrangements are observed in the
crystal packing of the isolated AAA+ domain of Escherichia coli
Matsuyama et al.

Molecular Determinants for c-di-GMP Recognition by FleQ’s AAA+
Domain. In the presence of c-di-GMP, a purified AAA–HTH

dual domain construct of P. aeruginosa FleQ (Pa_FleQAAA-HTH,
residues 137–477) crystallized in space group P6322 with a single
protomer per asymmetric unit. Although the crystals were
characterized by extremely high solvent content (∼80%) and
suboptimal anisotropic diffraction, the structure was determined
by Se-SAD to 3.3 Å resolution with good refinement statistics (Table
S1). The refined electron density map covers residues 138–393 and
excludes the C-terminal HTH domain, likely because of flexibility in
the loosely packed crystals and insignificant contribution to the X-ray
diffraction data.
Two molecules of c-di-GMP bind in their preferred intercalated dimer conformation in a region between subdomains
SD1 and SD2 that is different from the ATP-binding active site
(Fig. 2A and Fig. S1A). An earlier modeling study on a FleQ
homolog from Vibrio cholerae, FlrA, suggested that residues
corresponding to R144 and R185 of P. aeruginosa FleQ constitute
a conserved c-di-GMP binding site at the REC and AAA+ domain interface (26), which was recently confirmed by another
modeling-based study (32). The Pa_FleQAAA-HTH–c-di-GMP
cocrystal structure not only confirms the importance of these
residues for c-di-GMP recognition, but also reveals a composite
binding site with contributions from three key motifs within a single
FleQ protomer (Fig. 2A). Cis-acting residues include: a proximal
c-di-GMP-binding switch located at the N-terminus of the AAA+
domain that is composed of the LFR144S motif (R-switch); residues
R185 and N186 in helix α7 of subdomain SD1 (post-Walker A); and
finally, a distal c-di-GMP-binding motif comprising the ExxxR334
sequence in helix α13 of subdomain SD2 (Fig. 2 A and B). Isothermal titration calorimetry confirms both the stoichiometry of
binding (∼2:1 for c-di-GMP:Pa_FleQFull with an apparent affinity
constant Kd of ∼4.1 μM) and the role of conserved arginine residues in ligand coordination (Fig. S2 A and B).
A systematic sequence analysis of bEBPs revealed a higher
degree of conservation of c-di-GMP binding motifs (R-switch,
post-Walker A and ExxxR consensus motifs) within FleQ homologs (Fig. 2B). This group includes the c-di-GMP–responsive
regulator FlrA from V. cholerae, for which the importance of R135
PNAS | Published online December 28, 2015 | E211

PNAS PLUS

PspF (Ec_PspFAAA), a bEBP known to form discrete hexameric
rings in solution (29). PspF ring oligomers are believed to undergo sequential hydrolysis where asymmetry in the intersubunit
interactions confers cooperativity in nucleotide binding and catalysis (30). In addition, solution structural studies on ring hexamers of another nonhelical bEBP, NtrC1, revealed that one of
the intersubunit interfaces is significantly less tight, which led to
a mechanistic model where bEBP planar ring split is necessary to
drive interactions with the σ54-RNAP holoenzyme and ATPdependent remodeling (31).
Because the formation of ring-shaped FleQ assemblies would
only require subtle changes in the protomer-packing interfaces
observed in the crystalline spirals, we continued by examining the
actual oligomerization states of FleQ in solution. To this end, we
visualized full-length FleQ (Pa_FleQFull) by negative-stain electron microscopy following gel filtration in the presence of the
transition-state analog ADP-vanadate. Single-particle analysis of
the micrographs failed to reveal any filamentous structures but
showed discrete hexameric species that are consistent with canonical bEBP ring assembly rather than helical organization
(Fig. S1B). Although these experiments were performed under
saturating conditions of a single, nonhydrolyzable nucleotide
species and more studies are necessary to examine potential
conformational changes and asymmetry along the hydrolytic
cycle, it is possible that the crystal packing of the isolated AAA+
domain from both Pa_FleQ and Ec_PspF in the form of open
oligomers reflects a conserved mechanism for bEBP activation
and function.

MICROBIOLOGY

significant down-regulation of flagellar gene expression (13, 14,
21). In contrast, FleQ acts as a repressor of Pel EPS expression in
the absence of c-di-GMP. An increase of intracellular c-di-GMP
levels through the action of diguanylate cyclases not only relieves
FleQ-mediated gene repression, but it converts the protein into a
potent transcription activator (13). Strikingly, gene expression
activation under these conditions does not appear to require
FleQ’s intrinsic ATPase activity, is σ54-independent, and likely
proceeds through σ70 (21, 24). On both flagellar and pel promoters
FleN further modulates FleQ-mediated gene regulation (14, 21).
However, FleN’s effect on the regulation of flagella expression and
assembly is much more pronounced, with deletion of P. aeruginosa
fleN leading to multiflagellated cells and only a small down-regulation
in pel expression (14, 25).
How FleQ is able to exert such different effects and to sense
different regulatory inputs at its target promoters has so far
remained enigmatic. With regard to c-di-GMP signal recognition, at least two distinct modes of second-messenger binding in
the context of FleQ’s tertiary structure have been proposed (21,
26). It is unclear, however, how c-di-GMP recognition would
affect the various aspects of the protein’s higher-order regulatory
mechanics. Here we present crystallographic data and solutionbased structure-function analyses that reveal an unexpected
mode of c-di-GMP regulation. In particular, we show that
binding of the second messenger occurs at a composite site
within the FleQ AAA+ domain and is accompanied by a major
quaternary structure reorganization and allosteric ATPase inhibition. Our results reconcile previous modeling and functional
studies (13, 14, 21, 26), and provide an integrated model for
FleQ-dependent transcription regulation of genes involved in
EPS production and secretion.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Fig. 2. Crystal structure of c-di-GMP–bound Pa_FleQAAA-HTH reveals major oligomeric rearrangements. (A) Close-up view of the c-di-GMP binding site. Interactions (green dashes) between intercalated c-di-GMP dimer and conserved dinucleotide binding residues R144, R185, N186, E330, and R334 are shown. A
crystal symmetry-related protomer that completes the c-di-GMP binding site is shown in gray. Labels that refer to the symmetric protomer contain asterisks.
(B) Sequence conservation of the c-di-GMP binding site. Sequence logo representations of multisequence alignment for FleQ and NtrC1 homologs cover the
three motifs involved in c-di-GMP recognition within the AAA+ domain. bEBPs sequences without a regulatory N-terminal domain or with REC, GAF or FleQlike N-terminal domains were selected from the RP55 database with HMMER (60) and logos were generated with Skylign (61). Representative sequences are
shown on top of the logos: P. aeruginosa FleQ (Pa_FleQ); V. cholerae FlrA (Vc_FlrA); X. citri FleQ (Xc_FleQ); V. cholerae VpsR (Vc_VpsR); A. aeolicus (Aa_NtrC1);
Geobacter sulfurreducens NtrC (Gs_NtrC). (C) Comparison between c-di-GMP and ATP-γ-S–bound structures. Superposition of the respective SD1 domains
reveals a 9° rigid body rotation (black arrow) of the SD2 subdomain relative to the SD1 domain upon c-di-GMP binding. The c-di-GMP–bound Pa_FleQAAA-HTH
structure is colored as in Fig. 1; bound nucleotides are shown as sticks (yellow carbon atoms). (D) The N-terminal segment of FleQ’s AAA+ domain partially
occupies the ATP site in the c-di-GMP–bound structure. Solid surface representation of S145’s side chain and G179’s main chain indicate steric hindrance at the
ATP binding site caused by the conformational change induced by c-di-GMP. (E) Assembly composed of head-to-head dimers of c-di-GMP–stabilized trimers in
two orthogonal views. Pa_FleQAAA-HTH crystal symmetry-related protomers are colored in different shades of gray. (F) Protein–protein interfaces within the
c-di-GMP–bound Pa_FleQAAA-HTH dimer-of-trimers. The assembly involves head-to-head SD1/SD2 (Left) and SD2/SD2 (Center) interfaces and a c-di-GMP–
mediated (Right) interface. Dissociation energies (ΔiG) and corresponding interaction-specificities (ΔiG P value) for each individual interface (green dashes)
were calculated with the PISA server (36).

and R176 (corresponding to FleQ R144 and R185, respectively) for
c-di-GMP binding has been determined experimentally (26).
In particular, the coconservation of all three c-di-GMP-binding
E212 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523148113

motifs, and especially their arginine residues, is striking (Fig. 2B).
Consistent with this notion, isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) experiments with a FleQ homolog from Xanthomonas
Matsuyama et al.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Consequences of c-di-GMP Binding on FleQ’s Tertiary and Quaternary
Structure. Compared with apo, ADP-, and ATP-γ-S–bound

Pa_FleQAAA structures, the conformation of the c-di-GMPbound AAA+ ATPase σ54-interaction domain reveals novel and
unexpected features at both the tertiary and quaternary structure
levels. Protomer superposition using subdomain SD1 as the
reference reveals a 9° rigid body movement of subdomain SD2 to
a more compact, c-di-GMP–stabilized conformation relative to
the apo-, ADP-, and ATP-γ-S–bound structures (Fig. 2C). It has
been proposed previously that c-di-GMP competes with ATP for
binding to the AAA+ ATPase domain active site based on the fact
that c-di-GMP competitively inhibits ATP hydrolysis and that a
Walker A disruptive mutation (FleQ K180A) abolishes c-di-GMP
binding to FleQ (21). However, this model is at first sight inconsistent with the crystallographic analysis. Superposition of the
c-di-GMP– and ATP-γ-S–bound Pa_FleQAAA structures reconciles
the apparent contradictions by revealing that c-di-GMP binding
shifts the N terminus of the AAA+ domain into the ATP-binding
pocket (Fig. 2D), thus acting as an allosteric inhibitor of the protein’s hydrolytic activity and, by extension, of σ54-dependent transcription activation. Importantly, in the context of the full-length
protein, such an N-terminal movement in the FleQ AAA+ domain
would cause a drastic repositioning of the preceding FleQREC
module, possibly contributing to the disruption of the active-state
hexameric ring (Fig. S1C). Finally, residue K180 in the Walker A
motif occupies a pivotal location between the two AAA+ subdomains and plays a significant role in stabilizing interprotomer
interaction within Pa_FleQAAA hexameric rings (Fig. S1D). A
mutation in this position could interfere with both c-di-GMP–
mediated AAA+ interdomain movement and oligomeric assembly.
The structural organization of the c-di-GMP binding pocket
provides further evidence for negative coupling of this site with
the ATPase active site. The highly conserved residues R144, R185,
and R334 are not only directly involved in c-di-GMP coordinaTable 1. Sequences of bEBPs presenting conserved c-di-GMP
binding motifs
N-terminal regulatory
domain
FleQ‡
GAF
—
REC

Total of sequences
in RP55 database*
90
238
1257
3047

Sequences with
conserved c-di-GMP
binding motifs†
67
5
8
62

(74.4%)
(2.1%)
(0.6%)
(2.0%)

*Sequences of FleQ and NtrC (REC) homologs used for the Logo generation
in Fig. 2B.
†
All three motifs conserved; see Table S2 for accession numbers.
‡
FleQ refers to the N-terminal degenerated REC domain.

Matsuyama et al.

C-di-GMP Drives FleQ Oligomeric Reorganization in Solution. External signal stimuli, such as ligand binding (ATP or promoter
DNA) and protein phosphorylation at the REC domain, usually
trigger the switch of inactive bEBP dimers to ring-like activated
hexamers (17, 19, 37). In this regard, FleQ behavior deviates
once again from canonical bEBPs, by being able to spontaneously hexamerize in solution (21). In addition, although the
N-terminal domain of FleQ shares sequence homology with canonical REC domains, it lacks both sequence conservation at the
putative phosphorylation site and a cognate histidine kinase (12),
making regulatory phosphorylation unlikely.
To evaluate the role of ligand binding on FleQ oligomerization in solution, we captured discrete oligomeric species through
chemical cross-linking with the amine-reactive compound ethylene glycol bis-(succinimidyl succinate) (EGS). In agreement with
previous results (21), wild-type full-length FleQ (Pa_FleQFull)
showed a dimeric fraction as well as discrete higher-order species
(mostly tetramers and hexamers), regardless of the absence
or presence of ATP-γ-S (Fig. 3). A cross-linking time-course
revealed a gradual accumulation of the higher oligomeric species, suggesting an equilibrium between FleQ oligomers in solution (Fig. 3A). Most notably, however, addition of c-di-GMP
stalled FleQ oligomerization beyond a dimeric species, regardless of
ATP-γ-S availability (Fig. 3B). The striking effect of c-di-GMP on
FleQ’s oligomeric assembly mirrors the dinucleotide’s effect on
FleQ’s protease sensitivity (21), and corroborates c-di-GMP–driven
quaternary structure changes inferred from the crystal structures
(Figs. 1 and 2).
Similar cross-linking experiments using FleQ constructs lacking
the REC domain, Pa_FleQAAA and Pa_FleQAAA-HTH, showed less
pronounced effects (Fig. S4). In particular, oligomerization of
Pa_FleQAAA was severely compromised, with the protein migrating
mostly as a monomer, independent of nucleotide (Fig. S4A). This
result is consistent with a recent report that dimerization of the
noncanonical REC domains is critical for FleQ oligomerization and
function (32). Inclusion of the C-terminal HTH domain restored insolution dimerization partially (Fig. S4B). Addition of c-di-GMP
PNAS | Published online December 28, 2015 | E213

PNAS PLUS

tion (Fig. 2A and Fig. S2), but also directly or indirectly stabilize
ATP binding, as observed in the ADP and ATP-γ-S–complexed
Pa_FleQAAA crystal structures (Fig. 1C). In particular, residue R334
is in direct contact with the ribose moiety of ATP, while also stabilizing the N-terminal AAA+ domain segment through π-stacking
interactions with R144 (Fig. 1C). Similarly, residue R185 forms a salt
bridge with the Walker A residue E181, and might also sense nucleotide binding (Fig. 1C). All these specific interactions important
for ATP binding and hydrolysis are disrupted in the c-di-GMP–
bound state.
The most striking feature of the c-di-GMP–bound structure,
however, is the profound reorganization of crystallographic interfaces, which suggests dramatic quaternary structure reorganization upon allosteric second-messenger recognition. The observed
c-di-GMP–mediated subdomain movement and N-terminal
restructuring appear incompatible with the maintenance of canonical bEBP ring hexamers. Indeed, symmetry-related protomers
arrange into a distinct hexameric species where c-di-GMP–
stabilized trimers dimerize in a head-to-head fashion (“dimerof-trimers”) (Fig. 2E). Dissociation energy analyses of proteinprotein and c-di-GMP–protein interfaces (SD1/SD2, SD2/SD2, and
c-di-GMP–mediated interfaces) suggest biological relevance for
this unique oligomeric arrangement (Fig. 2F) (36). Within the trimeric assembly mediated by c-di-GMP, a total buried surface area
of about 1,400 Å2 yields a gain of −14.4 kcal/mol in solvation energy. The hexamer formed by SD1/SD2 and SD2/SD2 subdomain
pairings further occludes ∼4,300 Å2 of surface area, with a total
gain in solvation energy of −23.7 kcal/mol. To our knowledge, such
architecture is unprecedented for bEBP family members and underscores the unique mechanism of FleQ regulation and function.

MICROBIOLOGY

citri (XAC1967), which contains divergent c-di-GMP binding
motifs (Fig. 2B), failed to show c-di-GMP binding (Fig. S2C). On
the other hand, co-occurring arginine residues important for
c-di-GMP binding were found in several bEBPs with different
N-terminal regulatory domains (Fig. 2B, Table 1, Fig. S3, and Table
S2). Of 4,632 bEBPs mined from a representative proteome database (33), ∼3% presented conserved c-di-GMP binding residues,
suggesting that c-di-GMP regulation of bEBP-mediated transcription
may be more widely used than previously anticipated, potentially
participating in other cellular processes beyond flagellar regulation and EPS secretion (Fig. 2B and Table 1). Additionally, the
absence of the aforementioned conserved c-di-GMP binding
motifs in the atypical bEBP VpsR from V. cholerae (34) and in
AAA+ ATPases involved in multiple bacterial secretion systems
(35), all shown to bind to c-di-GMP, further suggest that bacterial
AAA+ domains may represent ubiquitous targets for c-di-GMP,
yet with distinct binding sites.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Fig. 3. Cross-linking analysis of full-length FleQ oligomerization in solution.
SDS/PAGE analyses of PA_FleQFull protein (10 μM) incubated with or without
the primary amine-specific cross-linker EGS are shown. (A) FleQ cross-linking
time course in the absence of nucleotides. The sample in lane 2 was not
incubated with EGS. All other samples were incubated with EGS (250 μM).
(B) Effects of nucleotides on FleQ cross-linking. Addition of nucleotides (100 μM)
is indicated above the gel. Where indicated, samples were incubated for
30 min at room temperature in the presence of EGS (1 mM). Migration pattern
of probable oligomeric species are indicated on the right of each gel.

stablized higher-order oligomers of Pa_FleQAAA (and to a lesser
extent Pa_FleQAAA-HTH) including trimers and hexamers, consistent with a change in quartenary structure and our crystallographic
analyses. These results mirror studies on trunctation mutants of
other bEBPs, which revealed oligomerization properties and functional activities distinct from their full-length counterparts. For example, removal of the N-terminal regulatory domain of Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium NtrC and Aquifex aeolicus NtrC1
inhibits or promotes, respectively, the formation of activated oligomeric ring assemblies (19, 20).
Taken together, our data indicate that c-di-GMP antagonizes
different FleQ oligomeric assemblies, in accordance with our
structural analyzes. The cross-linking studies not only indicate a
crucial role of the REC domain for spontaneous FleQ oligomerization but also suggest that hexamer formation may be a
prerequisite of c-di-GMP binding.
Functional Analysis of Interface-Disruptive FleQ Variants Confirm
Biological Significance of Crystallographic Oligomers. We next designed

a set of single-point mutations to confirm the role of crystallographic protein–protein and protein–ligand interfaces on full-length
FleQ oligomerization, as well as on ATPase activity and c-di-GMP
binding. Mutant I374E was designed to perturb formation of bEBP
canonical ring-like hexamers apparent in the apo-, ADP-, and ATPγ-S–bound Pa_FleQAAA structures; mutants R185E, N186A, E330A
and R334E were designed to directly inhibit c-di-GMP binding; and
two additional mutations were chosen to disrupt the SD1/SD2
(T149E) or SD2/SD2 (V380E) interfaces observed in the c-diGMP–bound Pa_FleQAAA-HTH structure (Fig. 4A). The proper
folding and preserved stability of all mutants introduced in the fulllength protein were verified by circular dichroism experiments of
thermal denaturation (Fig. S5A).
In the absence of c-di-GMP, higher molecular weight oligomers beyond dimers were severely disrupted only with the I374E
mutant, consistent with our structure-based prediction (Fig. 4B).
Mutants with disrupted c-di-GMP binding pocket (R185E and
R334E) retained wild-type–like oligomerization patterns, but
were impaired in c-di-GMP’s antagonistic effect on assembly
(Fig. 4B and Fig. S5B). Mutations designed to disrupt the interfaces SD1/SD2 and SD2/SD2 observed in the c-di-GMP–
bound structure, T149E and V380E, respectively, maintained
FleQ’s propensity to form hexamers, rendering the protein apE214 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523148113

parently insensititve to c-di-GMP (Fig. 4B, lanes 5–6, and Fig.
S4B). Hence, destabilization of the crystallographically observed
dimer-of-trimers appears to have a positive effect on the stability
of the canonical bEBP hexamer. Similar to wild-type FleQ, ATPγ-S did not alter the oligomerization propensities of any of the
mutants (Fig. S5B).
Based on the fact that FleQ is an active ATPase that is primarily dimeric in solution, it has been proposed previously that
the dimers are the catalytically active conformation (21). As we
show here, however, FleQ samples higher-order oligomeric
conformations in solution, including hexameric rings (Fig. 3 and
Fig. S1B), and its AAA+ domain crystallizes in a conformation
consistent with the active-state ring hexamers of canonical
bEBPs (Fig. 1D). These data prompted us to dissect the role of
oligomerization on the protein’s catalytic activity. In ATPase activity assays, we observed a severe reduction in the ATP hydrolysis
rate with the I374E mutant (Fig. 4C). Because the cross-linking
indicates a defect in hexamer formation while dimerization is
preserved in this mutant, these data assert the hexamer as the
catalytically active conformation.
The ATPase activity data also confirm conformational coupling between the c-di-GMP– and ATP-binding pockets: disruption of the conserved R185 and R334 residues abolishes not
only c-di-GMP binding, but also ATPase activity (Fig. 4C and
Fig. S2B), in line with their structural role in active-site stabilization (Fig. 1C). Mutants designed to disrupt crystallographic,
c-di-GMP–mediated dimer-of-trimers, T149E and V380E, have
preserved and even enhanced ATPase activity (7.5- and 1.5-fold
increase over wild-type for T149E and V380E, respectively) (Fig.
4C). Analysis of the known inhibitory effect of c-di-GMP on
FleQ’s ATPase activity (21) revealed that although the V380E
mutation reduces c-di-GMP sensitivity only slightly, the high
activity of the T149E mutant remains unaffected (Fig. 4D).
To evaluate the impact of SD1/SD2 or canonical ring interface
perturbations on c-di-GMP binding, we performed ITC experiments with FleQ variants T149E and I374E, respectively.
Under the same experimental conditions used for wild-type
Pa_FleQFull, ITC results with both mutants revealed a severe
reduction of heat released during the titration (Fig. 4E), indicating that disruptive mutations at both oligomeric interfaces
observed in the distinct crystallographic hexamers (ring-shaped
or dimer-of-trimers) (Figs. 1D and 2E) negatively affects c-di-GMP
binding.
FleQ Oligomeric Reorganization Triggered by c-di-GMP Is Compatible
with Its Repressor-to-Activator Functional Transition on EPS Gene
Expression. FleQ recognizes two sites (FleQ boxes 1 and 2),

separated by 34 bp, in the pelA promoter region (Fig. S6) (13).
Previous reports showed that FleQ, stabilized by FleN and ATP/
ADP, binds to both sites simultaneously, promoting a kink in
the DNA and thus repressing gene expression (13). C-di-GMP
binding to FleQ relieves the DNA distortion and activates gene
expression without affecting the apparent protein occupancy on
DNA (13, 14). In a mutant strain with a fleN deletion, FleQ still
acts as an ATP-independent repressor of pel expression and increased c-di-GMP levels induce FleQ-mediated pel expression,
albeit at a reduced level (14). Hence, the ΔfleN genetic background offers a unique possibility to examine directly the role of
FleQ’s quaternary structure on pel transcriptional repression and
activation. To evaluate the physiological role of the structural
transition observed in vitro on transcriptional regulation via
FleQ, we tested the effect of the various FleQ variants on pel
operon expression in vivo.
Wild-type or mutant FleQ was expressed from a single-copy
under its native promoter in a ΔfleN background. Elevated c-diGMP levels were achieved by the coexpression of the active
diguanylate cyclase YfiN/TpbB/PA1120 (38, 39). In line with
previous results, pel expression was markedly enhanced upon YfiN
Matsuyama et al.

PNAS PLUS
MICROBIOLOGY

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Fig. 4. Functional analyses of structure-guided Pa_FleQFull mutants. (A) Overview of site-directed mutants and predicted outcome. The diagram shows the
position of each mutant on a cartoon of the hexameric ring or the dimer-of-trimers assembly. Predicted outcomes on FleQ function are indicated, distinguishing between indifferent (=), positive (↑), and negative (↓). (B) Cross-linking analysis. Mutant proteins were treated as described in Fig. 3, which shows
the corresponding data for wild-type protein. (C) ATPase activity. Initial velocity of Pa_FleQFull variant-catalyzed ATP hydrolysis is shown expressed as percentage of wild-type Pa_FleQFull activity (1 μM protein; 1 mM ATP). The error bars represent SDs of triplicates. (D) c-di-GMP effect on ATP hydrolysis. ATPase
activity of selected FleQ variants preincubated with c-di-GMP (50 μM). The error bars represent SDs of triplicates. (E) c-di-GMP binding. ITC of Pa_FleQFull T149E
and I374E. The heat change upon ligand binding (μcal/s) and fitted curves to the integrated heat peaks are shown in the top and bottom titration curves,
respectively. Binding stoichiometry and apparent dissociation constants are indicated in the table inset.

coexpression with wild-type FleQ, indicating c-di-GMP–dependent
transcription derepression and activation (Fig. 5A) (14). As expected, both promoter repression and YfiN effects were abolished
in a fleQ deletion strain. Consistent with the structural and
biochemical data, c-di-GMP binding mutants (R185E, N186A,
E330A, and R334E) exhibited markedly repressed pel transcription
similar to wild-type fleQ, but remained virtually unchanged upon
YfiN overexpression (Fig. 5A). The mutant T149E, predicted to
disrupt the c-di-GMP–stablized crystallographic dimer-of-trimers, also yielded repressed pel transcription, independent of
c-di-GMP. Consistent with its residual c-di-GMP sensitivity
as demonstrated by the ATPase data, mutant V380E showed a
somewhat derepressed pel transcription upon coexpression of a
diguanylate cyclase (Figs. 4 and 5A). Notably, the I374E mutant
was characterized by constitutively active pel expression, suggesting that hexameric ring formation is required for repression of the operon (Fig. 5A).
Taken together, the expression data in mutant genetic backgrounds corroborate the structural and biochemical results, indicating an equilibrium between ATPase-active, pel repressive
Matsuyama et al.

hexamers, and other less-functional oligomeric species. However, ATPase activity is not required for FleQ’s function as a
transcriptional repressor at the pel operon. C-di-GMP appears to
exert its stimulatory effect on pel expression on FleQ variants
that retain their ability to form hexamers and display an intact
dinucleotide binding site (e.g., wild-type and V380E).
Discussion
In response to specific stimuli, canonical bEBPs from the large
AAA+ family of σ54-dependent transcription regulators couple
ATP hydrolysis to promoter-RNAP initiation complex remodeling
to control associated gene expression (15). Although unusual, some
bacterial activators, such as Pseudomonas putida PhhR, E. coli
TyrR, Rhodobacter capsulatus HupR, and Myxococcus xanthus HsfA
share similar domain architecture with bEBPs, but activate the
σ70-RNAP holoenzyme instead of the σ54-associated transcriptional
machinery (40–42). P. aeruginosa FleQ combines both canonical
bEBP σ54- and atypical σ70-dependent transcriptional mechanisms to
inversely control flagellar motility and EPS production, respectively
(13, 14, 21). Significantly, FleQ is also regulated by the bacterial
PNAS | Published online December 28, 2015 | E215

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Fig. 5. Effect of FleQ site-directed mutants on pel transcriptional control. (A) Expression data. Relative pelA transcript levels in strains of P. aeruginosa PAO1
that lack fleN (designated WT) or fleN and fleQ (designated/ΔfleQ) were quantified by RT-PCR. Structure-guided mutations in the fleQ gene were expressed
from a single copy introduced into the ΔfleN/ΔfleQ genome. Transcripts were measured with (blue; + c-di-GMP) or without (gray; − c-di-GMP) expression of
the diguanylate cyclase PA1120 from a plasmid. Unbroken (ΔfleN/ΔfleQ) and dashed (ΔfleN; wild-type FleQ) colored lines indicate reference pel expression
levels at low and high c-di-GMP conditions. (B) Molecular model of FleQ-mediated pel transcription. The diagram depicts a model incorporating our structural
and functional data, focusing on the events in the absence of FleN and ATP.

second messenger dinucleotide, c-di-GMP (14). To gain molecular
insight into the mechanism of c-di-GMP–dependent regulation
of P. aeruginosa EPS gene expression by FleQ, we determined
structures of its AAA+ domain in the apo-state and bound to
ADP, ATP-γ-S, and c-di-GMP. Analyses of these structures,
combined with in vitro and in vivo functional studies, revealed
that P. aeruginosa FleQ undergoes a major conformational
change upon c-di-GMP binding, concomitant with oligomeric
rearrangement.
On one hand, the results presented here indicate a hexameric
FleQ as the functional pel transcription repressor and as the
target of c-di-GMP, because destablilization of the canonical
AAA+ ring interfaces reduces c-di-GMP binding to FleQ (mutant I374E) (Figs. 4 and 5 and Fig. S1C). On the other hand,
perturbations at the unique interfaces that support the crystallographic, c-di-GMP–bound FleQ dimer-of-trimers (e.g., mutants T149E and V380E) not only render the protein variants
insensitive to c-di-GMP, but also stabilize highly ATPase-active
FleQ oligomers (Fig. 4). This finding may suggest that different
FleQ oligomers with distinct properties exist in equilibrium
(Fig. 4).
In light of our results and previous studies on the regulation of
EPS gene expression, we propose that canonical bEBP ring-like
FleQ hexamers (Fig. 1D and Fig. S1B) bind both boxes 1 and 2 at
the pelA promoter, which inhibits transcription initiation (Fig.
5B). Apparently, FleQ’s function as a pel repressor in the absence of the cofactor FleN does not require its ATPase activity,
but depends on the protein’s ability to form higher-order oligomers, in particular hexameric rings (Figs. 4 and 5). The hexamerto-DNA interaction model is also compatible with the promoter
bending observed previously (Fig. S6) (13). The current hypothesis
is that association of ATP-bound FleN to the FleQ:DNA complex
is necessary to increase DNA curvature in vitro and that the FleQ–
FleN interaction cooperatively enhances c-di-GMP binding (13,
21), consistent with full activation of FleQ-c-di-GMP–mediated
pel transcription requiring FleN (14). In analogy, the repression of
σ70-dependent tyrR expression by the atypical bEBP TyrR from
E. coli occurs via binding of tyrosine-stabilized hexamers to two
adjacent sites at the promoter DNA (14, 43–46), suggesting that the
E216 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523148113

mechanism described here might be a recurrent form of transcriptional repression by atypical bEBPs.
In the presence of c-di-GMP, FleQ undergoes conformational
changes and alters its quaternary structure (Figs. 2 and 3), which
may decrease affinity for at least some promoter interaction
sites, thus relieving DNA bending and activating gene transcription (Fig. 5 and Fig. S6) (14). bEBPs interact with σ54 via
two loops, L1 and L2. However, in our structures, these loops are
accessible in the c-di-GMP–stabilized oligomer and not subject
to conformational changes (Fig. 2C), suggesting a mode of
transcriptional activation different from canonical bEBPs (18).
The lack of conservation or absence of σ54-interacting loops in
other σ70-dependent bEBP, such as E. coli TyrR and P. putida
PhhR, respectively, argues further against their role in the direct
activation of pel expression (40, 46).
Our data explain the molecular mechanism underlying c-diGMP regulation of FleQ’s functions as repressor and activator of
pel expression, which likely depends on σ70 and is only moderately affected by the cofactor ATPase FleN. Future studies will
focus on the roles of the N-terminal regulatory domains upstream of the AAA+ core and accessory proteins such as FleN in
the context of FleQ’s oligomeric states, and in particular on the
regulation of flagellar gene regulation. The latter process requires FleQ’s ATPase activity and σ54, distinct from the mechanism described here, and presumably mirrors those of canonical
bEBPs. How σ54- and ATPase-dependent processes are coordinated with σ70-dependent but ATPase-independent regulation at different promoters remains an open question.
Materials and Methods
Recombinant DNA Techniques. DNA manipulations were carried out using
standard molecular biology techniques. For protein expression and purification, the ORFs of full-length and truncated FleQ variants were PCRamplified from P. aeuruginosa PA14 genomic DNA and cloned in-frame into a modified pET28a expression plasmid (Novagen). Expression yields
recombinant proteins with an N-terminal hexahistidine-SUMO moiety that
can be liberated by incubation with yeast Ulp1 protease. FleQ point mutants
were generated using QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent),
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Successful mutagenesis was confirmed by DNA sequencing.

Matsuyama et al.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy. Circular dichroism measurements were
performed using a J-720 (JASCO) spectroscope. Initial spectra of Pa_FleQFull
and mutants (5 μM in 20 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.2; 0.1-cm light-path
quartz cuvette) were obtained by averaging 16 scans over a wavelength
range of 200–260 nm. To eliminate background effects, buffer contributions
were subtracted in all measurements. Spectra were transformed to molar
ellipticity (θ). Thermal denaturation analyses were carried out by measuring
the ellipticity at 220 nm over a temperature range from 10 °C to 95 °C, at a
constant heating rate of 10 °C/h. The fraction of denatured protein was
calculated from the relationship (θn − θobs)/(θn − θd), where θobs is the ellipticity of the sample at a particular temperature and θd and θn are the values
of ellipticity characteristic of the denatured and native state, respectively.
Crystallization, Data Collection, and Structure Determination. Initial crystallization screens were conducted via sitting-drop vapor diffusion using commercial crystallization screens. Pa_FleQAAA crystallized at 18 °C against a
solution of 0.1 M Bis-Tris pH 6.5, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, and 25% (wt/vol)
PEG3350. For crystallization of ADP- and ATP-γ-S–bound Pa_FleQAAA, the
protein was preincubated with a fivefold molar excess of nucleotide for 2 h
at 10 °C. Crystals of c-di-GMP–bound Pa_FleQAAA-HTH were obtained at 4 °C
in the presence of 1 mM c-di-GMP in the drop and 0.05 M Bis-Tris pH 6.5,
30% (vol/vol) pentaerythritol ethoxylate (15/4 EO/OH), and 0.05 M ammonium sulfate in the mother liquor.
For data collection, crystals were soaked in mother liquor supplemented
with cryo-protectants [up to 25% (wt/vol) xylitol or ethylene glycol] and flashfrozen in liquid nitrogen. Diffraction data were collected using either a Curotating anode X-ray source (Pa_FleQAAA–ATP-γ-S) or synchrotron beamlines
(beamline MX2 of the Laboratório Nacional de Luz Síncrotron, Campinas,
Brazil, for apo-Pa_FleQAAA and Pa_FleQAAA-ADP; beamline A1 at Cornell
High Energy Synchrotron Source, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY or beamline
24-ID at Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratories, Argonne,
IL, for Pa_FleQAAA-HTH-c-di-GMP). All diffraction images were processed using the software package XDS (47). The apo-FleQAAA structure was solved
using SAD with iodine as the anomalous scatterer, collected on crystals that
were soaked in mother liquor supplemented with 500 mM NaI and 10% (vol/vol)
ethylene glycol (48, 49). Initial phases were extended to 1.8 Å resolution from a
native dataset using the PHENIX program package (50). ADP- and ATP-γ-S–
bound Pa_FleQAAA were solved by molecular replacement in PHENIX, with the
apo structure as the starting model. The structure of Pa_FleQAAA-HTH–c-di-GMP
was solved by SAD phasing with data collected on crystals grown from selenomethionine-derivatized protein. The heavy atom positions were determined
with SHELX (51) and automatic building was conducted in PHENIX. For all constructs, iterative model building and refinement in COOT (52) and PHENIX
yielded the final structural models.
Electron Microscopy. Pa_FleQFull (50 μM) was incubated with 100 μM ADP,
200 μM sodium vanadate, and 500 μM MgCl2. Following a 30-min incubation on
ice, the protein was gel-filtered against an ADP-vanadate–containing buffer

Matsuyama et al.

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry. Apparent dissociation constants (Kd) and
stoichiometry of interaction (n) were measured by ITC using a VP-ITC calorimeter (Microcal). Calorimetric titrations of c-di-GMP (700 μM in the syringe;
7-μL injections) and wild-type or mutant Pa_FleQFull (30 μM in the cuvette)
were carried out at 25 °C in assay buffer (25 mM Tris·HCl pH 8.0, 300 mM
NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2) with 150-s spacing between injections. ITC data were
analyzed by integrating heat effects normalized to the amount of injected
protein and curve-fitting based on a single-site binding model using the
MicroCal Origin 7.0 software. Heat changes during ITC titrations likely
combine contributions from c-di-GMP binding and accompanied changes in
intra- and intermolecular protein interfaces. Heat from the dilution of c-diGMP alone was subtracted before data analysis and the first injection was
omitted from data processing.
In-Solution Chemical Cross-Linking. For oligomeric state detection, protein in
cross-linking buffer (25 mM Hepes pH 8.0 and 300 mM NaCl) was incubated
with EGS at room temperature. Protein and cross-linker concentrations and
incubation times are specified in the respective figure legends. Cross-linking
reactions were quenched by adding 50 mM Tris·HCl pH 8.0, followed by
incubation at 97 °C for 10 min in standard SDS/PAGE sample buffer. Oligomer formation was analyzed by SDS/PAGE.
ATPase Activity Assay. ATPase activity of wild-type and mutant Pa_FleQFull
was measured with the EnzChek Phosphate Assay kit (Life Technologies)
(56). Assays were performed in triplicates in a 96-well plate according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, ATPase reactions (200 μL; 1 μM enzyme)
were carried in ATPase buffer (25 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl buffer,
1 mM DTT, 10 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM ATP). The reactions were
monitored at 1-min intervals at 360 nm in a microplate reader.
P. aeruginosa Strain Construction, RNA Isolation, and Real-Time Quantitative
PCR. P. aeruginosa strains PAO1ΔfleQΔfleN or strains containing different
mutations in the fleQ gene were routinely grown in LB medium at 37 °C.
Mutations in the fleQ gene were generated by an overlapping PCR procedure. Briefly, PCR fragments containing the mutated fleQ gene and
flanking genomic DNA were cloned into pEX19Gm or miniCTX2. fleQWT
and fleQR334E were cloned into miniCTX2. fleQI374E, fleQV256E, fleQR185E,
fleQV380E, and fleQT149E were cloned into pEX19Gm. The resulting plasmids
were then used to transform E. coli S17-1 strain and mobilized into the
PAO1ΔfleQΔfleN strain. MiniCTX2 constructions allow the introduction of
fleQWT and fleQR334E at the attB site on the P. aeruginosa chromosome,
whereas pEX19Gm constructions allow the introduction of fleQ variant alleles at the fleQ native location. Plasmids pJN1120 (expressing YfiN/TpbB/
PA1120 diguanylate cyclase) and pJN105 (empty vector) were electroporated
into the constructed strains (14, 57, 58). Cell growth, RNA extraction, and RTPCR were performed essentially as previously described (13, 14, 59). The
pelA-forward (CCT TCA GCC ATC CGT TCT TCT) and pelA-reverse (TCG CGT
ACG AAG TCG ACC TT) primers were used. Genomic DNA was used as a
standard and transcript levels of all genes were normalized to total cDNA.
Data presented are at least the average of two biological replicates. Error
bars represent the SD between samples.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Rémi Fronzes for providing access to
electron microscopy data collection and analysis software; and João
Muniz and Raj Rajashankar for collecting diffraction data. Part of this
work is based upon research conducted at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS), which is supported by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) under award DMR-1332208, using the Macromolecular

PNAS | Published online December 28, 2015 | E217

PNAS PLUS

[20 mM Tris·HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 2.5% (wt/vol) xylitol, 100 μM ADP,
200 μM sodium vanadate, and 500 μM MgCl2] on a Superdex 200 10/300 GL
size exclusion column (GE Healthcare). Five-microliter drops of protein at concentrations between 0.005 and 0.1 mg/mL were placed directly on glow-discharged
carbon-coated grids (EMS) for 1 min. The grids were then blot-dried on filter
paper and negatively stained with 2% (wt/vol) uranyl acetate in water. Specimens were examined on an FEI Tecnai T12 BioTWIN LaB6 electron microscope
operating at 120 kV at nominal magnifications of 49,000 and 1–3 μm defocus.
Images were recorded on a Gatan Ultrascan 4000 CCD camera. The contrast transfer function parameters were assessed using CTFFIND3 (53) and
the phase flipping was done in SPIDER (54). Single particles were boxed
manually and a single-particle stack was generated in EMAN2 (4,856
particles, 170 × 170-pixel box, 2.2 Å per pixel) (55). Normalization, centering,
multireference alignment, multistatistical analysis, classification (∼40 particles
per class), and rotational autocorrelation function calculation were done in
IMAGIC-4D (Image Science Software).

MICROBIOLOGY

Protein Expression and Purification. Native and selenomethionine-derivatized
proteins were overexpressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) (Novagen) or T7 Crystal
Express (New England Biolabs) cells, respectively. For the expression of native proteins, cells were grown at 37 °C in lysogeny broth (LB) medium
supplemented with 50 μg/mL kanamycin. At a cell density corresponding to
an absorbance of 0.6 at 600 nm (OD600), the temperature was reduced to
20 °C and protein production was induced with 1 mM IPTG. Selenomethionine-derivatized proteins were produced in cells grown in M9 minimal medium supplemented with 50 μg/mL kanamycin, 1 μg/mL thiamine, 1 μg/mL
biotin, 0.4% glucose, and 40 μg/mL of each of the 20 amino acids with
selenomethionine substituting for methionine. Protein expression was induced at an OD600 of 0.4. After overnight expression, the cells were harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in resuspension buffer (25 mM
Tris·HCl pH 8.0 and 300 mM NaCl) and lysed by sonication. Cell debris was
removed by centrifugation and the cleared lysates were loaded onto TALON
metal affinity resin (Clontech). The matrix was washed with 20 column
volumes (CV) of resuspension buffer, followed by elution of bound proteins
with elution buffer (25 mM Tris·HCl pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, and 500 mM
imidazole). The eluted fractions were buffer-exchanged into resuspension
buffer and incubated with Ulp1 protease at 4 °C overnight. Cleaved His6SUMO tags and uncut protein was removed via TALON metal affinity
chromatography, and the cleaved target proteins were recovered in the
flow-through. Purified protein was subjected to size exclusion chromatography on a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) in gelfiltration buffer (25 mM Tris·HCl pH 8.0 and 300 mM NaCl). Purity of the
proteins was analyzed by SDS/PAGE.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Diffraction at CHESS (MacCHESS) facility, which is supported by award
GM-103485 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences, National Institutes of Health (NIH). The Northeastern Collaborative Access
Team beamlines are funded by National Institute of General Medical Sciences/NIH under Award P41-GM103403. This research used resources of
the Brazilian National Synchrotron Light Source (LNLS) and the Advanced
Photon Source, a US Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility

operated for the Department of Energy Office of Science by Argonne
National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. P.V.K. is currently supported by the European Research Council. Our work was supported by Fundaçao de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo under
Grant 2009/13238-0 (to M.V.A.S.N.) and Fundaçao de Amparo à Pesquisa
do Estado de Sao Paulo Fellowship 2011/24168-2 (to B.Y.M.); and by the
NIH under Grants R01-AI097307 (to H.S.) and R01-GM56665 (to C.S.H.).

1. Hall-Stoodley L, Costerton JW, Stoodley P (2004) Bacterial biofilms: From the natural
environment to infectious diseases. Nat Rev Microbiol 2(2):95–108.
2. Solano C, Echeverz M, Lasa I (2014) Biofilm dispersion and quorum sensing. Curr Opin
Microbiol 18:96–104.
3. Srivastava D, Waters CM (2012) A tangled web: Regulatory connections between
quorum sensing and cyclic Di-GMP. J Bacteriol 194(17):4485–4493.
4. Teschler JK, et al. (2015) Living in the matrix: Assembly and control of Vibrio cholerae
biofilms. Nat Rev Microbiol 13(5):255–268.
5. Tolker-Nielsen T (2014) Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm infections: From molecular
biofilm biology to new treatment possibilities. APMIS Suppl (138):1–51.
6. Furukawa S, Kuchma SL, O’Toole GA (2006) Keeping their options open: Acute versus
persistent infections. J Bacteriol 188(4):1211–1217.
7. Mills E, Pultz IS, Kulasekara HD, Miller SI (2011) The bacterial second messenger c-diGMP: Mechanisms of signalling. Cell Microbiol 13(8):1122–1129.
8. Römling U, Galperin MY, Gomelsky M (2013) Cyclic di-GMP: The first 25 years of a
universal bacterial second messenger. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 77(1):1–52.
9. Sondermann H, Shikuma NJ, Yildiz FH (2012) You’ve come a long way: c-di-GMP
signaling. Curr Opin Microbiol 15(2):140–146.
10. Krasteva PV, Giglio KM, Sondermann H (2012) Sensing the messenger: The diverse
ways that bacteria signal through c-di-GMP. Protein Sci 21(7):929–948.
11. Schirmer T, Jenal U (2009) Structural and mechanistic determinants of c-di-GMP signalling. Nat Rev Microbiol 7(10):724–735.
12. Arora SK, Ritchings BW, Almira EC, Lory S, Ramphal R (1997) A transcriptional activator, FleQ, regulates mucin adhesion and flagellar gene expression in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in a cascade manner. J Bacteriol 179(17):5574–5581.
13. Baraquet C, Murakami K, Parsek MR, Harwood CS (2012) The FleQ protein from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa functions as both a repressor and an activator to control
gene expression from the pel operon promoter in response to c-di-GMP. Nucleic Acids
Res 40(15):7207–7218.
14. Hickman JW, Harwood CS (2008) Identification of FleQ from Pseudomonas aeruginosa as a c-di-GMP–responsive transcription factor. Mol Microbiol 69(2):376–389.
15. Ghosh T, Bose D, Zhang X (2010) Mechanisms for activating bacterial RNA polymerase. FEMS Microbiol Rev 34(5):611–627.
16. Gao R, Mack TR, Stock AM (2007) Bacterial response regulators: Versatile regulatory
strategies from common domains. Trends Biochem Sci 32(5):225–234.
17. Gao R, Stock AM (2010) Molecular strategies for phosphorylation-mediated regulation of response regulator activity. Curr Opin Microbiol 13(2):160–167.
18. Bush M, Dixon R (2012) The role of bacterial enhancer binding proteins as specialized
activators of σ54-dependent transcription. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 76(3):497–529.
19. De Carlo S, et al. (2006) The structural basis for regulated assembly and function of
the transcriptional activator NtrC. Genes Dev 20(11):1485–1495.
20. Lee SY, et al. (2003) Regulation of the transcriptional activator NtrC1: Structural
studies of the regulatory and AAA+ ATPase domains. Genes Dev 17(20):2552–2563.
21. Baraquet C, Harwood CS (2013) Cyclic diguanosine monophosphate represses bacterial flagella synthesis by interacting with the Walker A motif of the enhancer-binding
protein FleQ. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(46):18478–18483.
22. Dasgupta N, Ramphal R (2001) Interaction of the antiactivator FleN with the transcriptional activator FleQ regulates flagellar number in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
J Bacteriol 183(22):6636–6644.
23. Jyot J, Dasgupta N, Ramphal R (2002) FleQ, the major flagellar gene regulator in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, binds to enhancer sites located either upstream or atypically downstream of the RpoN binding site. J Bacteriol 184(19):5251–5260.
24. Dasgupta N, et al. (2003) A four-tiered transcriptional regulatory circuit controls
flagellar biogenesis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mol Microbiol 50(3):809–824.
25. Dasgupta N, Arora SK, Ramphal R (2000) fleN, a gene that regulates flagellar number
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J Bacteriol 182(2):357–364.
26. Srivastava D, Hsieh ML, Khataokar A, Neiditch MB, Waters CM (2013) Cyclic di-GMP
inhibits Vibrio cholerae motility by repressing induction of transcription and inducing
extracellular polysaccharide production. Mol Microbiol 90(6):1262–1276.
27. Dago AE, Wigneshweraraj SR, Buck M, Morett E (2007) A role for the conserved
GAFTGA motif of AAA+ transcription activators in sensing promoter DNA conformation. J Biol Chem 282(2):1087–1097.
28. Wendler P, Ciniawsky S, Kock M, Kube S (2012) Structure and function of the AAA+
nucleotide binding pocket. Biochim Biophys Acta 1823(1):2–14.
29. Rappas M, et al. (2005) Structural insights into the activity of enhancer-binding proteins. Science 307(5717):1972–1975.
30. Zhang N, et al. (2014) Subunit dynamics and nucleotide-dependent asymmetry of an
AAA(+) transcription complex. J Mol Biol 426(1):71–83.
31. Sysoeva TA, Chowdhury S, Guo L, Nixon BT (2013) Nucleotide-induced asymmetry
within ATPase activator ring drives σ54-RNAP interaction and ATP hydrolysis. Genes
Dev 27(22):2500–2511.

32. Su T, et al. (2015) The REC domain mediated dimerization is critical for FleQ from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa to function as a c-di-GMP receptor and flagella gene regulator. J Struct Biol 192(1):1–13.
33. Chen C, et al. (2011) Representative proteomes: A stable, scalable and unbiased
proteome set for sequence analysis and functional annotation. PLoS One 6(4):e18910.
34. Srivastava D, Harris RC, Waters CM (2011) Integration of cyclic di-GMP and quorum
sensing in the control of vpsT and aphA in Vibrio cholerae. J Bacteriol 193(22):
6331–6341.
35. Trampari E, et al. (2015) Bacterial rotary export ATPases are allosterically regulated by
the nucleotide second messenger cyclic-di-GMP. J Biol Chem 290(40):24470–24483.
36. Krissinel E (2015) Stock-based detection of protein oligomeric states in jsPISA. Nucleic
Acids Res 43(W1):W314–W319.
37. Wigneshweraraj SR, et al. (2005) The second paradigm for activation of transcription.
Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol 79:339–369.
38. Kulasakara H, et al. (2006) Analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa diguanylate cyclases
and phosphodiesterases reveals a role for bis-(3′-5′)-cyclic-GMP in virulence. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 103(8):2839–2844.
39. Malone JG, et al. (2010) YfiBNR mediates cyclic di-GMP dependent small colony variant formation and persistence in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. PLoS Pathog 6(3):
e1000804.
40. Herrera MC, Krell T, Zhang X, Ramos JL (2009) PhhR binds to target sequences at
different distances with respect to RNA polymerase in order to activate transcription.
J Mol Biol 394(3):576–586.
41. Pittard J, Camakaris H, Yang J (2005) The TyrR regulon. Mol Microbiol 55(1):16–26.
42. Ueki T, Inouye S (2002) Transcriptional activation of a heat-shock gene, lonD, of
Myxococcus xanthus by a two component histidine-aspartate phosphorelay system.
J Biol Chem 277(8):6170–6177.
43. Andrews AE, Lawley B, Pittard AJ (1991) Mutational analysis of repression and activation of the tyrP gene in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 173(16):5068–5078.
44. Dixon MP, et al. (2002) The central domain of Escherichia coli TyrR is responsible for
hexamerization associated with tyrosine-mediated repression of gene expression.
J Biol Chem 277(26):23186–23192.
45. Wilson TJ, Maroudas P, Howlett GJ, Davidson BE (1994) Ligand-induced self-association of the Escherichia coli regulatory protein TyrR. J Mol Biol 238(3):309–318.
46. Yang J, et al. (2004) Mode of action of the TyrR protein: Repression and activation of
the tyrP promoter of Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 52(1):243–256.
47. Kabsch W (2010) XDS. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66(Pt 2):125–132.
48. Dauter Z, Dauter M, Rajashankar KR (2000) Novel approach to phasing proteins:
Derivatization by short cryo-soaking with halides. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr
56(Pt 2):232–237.
49. Nagem RA, et al. (2005) Getting the most out of X-ray home sources. Acta Crystallogr
D Biol Crystallogr 61(Pt 8):1022–1030.
50. Adams PD, et al. (2010) PHENIX: a comprehensive Python-based system for macromolecular structure solution. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66(Pt 2):213–221.
51. Sheldrick GM (2008) A short history of SHELX. Acta Crystallogr A 64(Pt 1):112–122.
52. Emsley P, Lohkamp B, Scott WG, Cowtan K (2010) Features and development of Coot.
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66(Pt 4):486–501.
53. Mindell JA, Grigorieff N (2003) Accurate determination of local defocus and specimen
tilt in electron microscopy. J Struct Biol 142(3):334–347.
54. Shaikh TR, et al. (2008) SPIDER image processing for single-particle reconstruction of
biological macromolecules from electron micrographs. Nat Protoc 3(12):1941–1974.
55. Tang G, et al. (2007) EMAN2: An extensible image processing suite for electron microscopy. J Struct Biol 157(1):38–46.
56. Webb MR (1992) A continuous spectrophotometric assay for inorganic phosphate and
for measuring phosphate release kinetics in biological systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
89(11):4884–4887.
57. Choi KH, Kumar A, Schweizer HP (2006) A 10-min method for preparation of highly
electrocompetent Pseudomonas aeruginosa cells: Application for DNA fragment
transfer between chromosomes and plasmid transformation. J Microbiol Methods
64(3):391–397.
58. Newman JR, Fuqua C (1999) Broad-host-range expression vectors that carry the
L-arabinose-inducible Escherichia coli araBAD promoter and the araC regulator. Gene
227(2):197–203.
59. Schuster M, Lostroh CP, Ogi T, Greenberg EP (2003) Identification, timing, and signal
specificity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum-controlled genes: A transcriptome
analysis. J Bacteriol 185(7):2066–2079.
60. Finn RD, et al. (2015) HMMER web server: 2015 update. Nucleic Acids Res 43(W1):
W30–W38.
61. Wheeler TJ, Clements J, Finn RD (2014) Skylign: A tool for creating informative, interactive logos representing sequence alignments and profile hidden Markov models.
BMC Bioinformatics 15:7.
62. Vidangos N, et al. (2013) Structure, function, and tethering of DNA-binding domains
in σ(54) transcriptional activators. Biopolymers 99(12):1082–1096.

E218 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523148113

Matsuyama et al.

