Superstructure of the centromeric complex of
TubZRC plasmid partitioning systems
Christopher H. S. Aylett and Jan Löwe1
Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Division of Structural Studies, Cambridge CB2 0QH, United Kingdom

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Edited by J. Richard McIntosh, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, and approved August 30, 2012 (received for review June 26, 2012)

Bacterial plasmid partitioning systems segregate plasmids into each
daughter cell. In the well-understood ParMRC plasmid partitioning
system, adapter protein ParR binds to centromere parC, forming
a helix around which the DNA is externally wrapped. This complex
stabilizes the growth of a ﬁlament of actin-like ParM protein, which
pushes the plasmids to the poles. The TubZRC plasmid partitioning
system consists of two proteins, tubulin-like TubZ and TubR, and
a DNA centromere, tubC, which perform analogous roles to those
in ParMRC, despite being unrelated in sequence and structure. We
have dissected in detail the binding sites that comprise Bacillus
thuringiensis tubC, visualized the TubRC complex by electron microscopy, and determined a crystal structure of TubR bound to the
tubC repeat. We show that the TubRC complex takes the form of
a ﬂexible DNA–protein ﬁlament, formed by lateral coating along the
plasmid from tubC, the full length of which is required for the successful in vitro stabilization of TubZ ﬁlaments. We also show that
TubR from Bacillus megaterium forms a helical superstructure resembling that of ParR. We suggest that the TubRC DNA–protein
ﬁlament may bind to, and stabilize, the TubZ ﬁlament by forming
such a ring-like structure around it. The helical superstructure of this
TubRC may indicate convergent evolution between the actincontaining ParMRC and tubulin-containing TubZRC systems.
FtsZ

| X-ray crystallography | DNA segregation

L

ow copy number plasmids often encode their own segregation
machinery, ensuring that copies are partitioned into each
daughter cell. These plasmid-partitioning systems organize replicated plasmids and actively separate them. The known plasmidpartitioning systems are minimalist and elegant. They consist of
just three components: a DNA centromere, an adapter protein
that binds the centromere, forming the centromeric complex,
and a nucleotide triphosphate-dependent ﬁlament-forming protein, which produces the force to move the plasmids (1, 2).
Plasmid partitioning systems have been divided into types
I–III, based upon the homology of their ﬁlament-forming proteins to known protein families (2, 3). Type I plasmid partitioning systems (4, 5) are based on deviant Walker A ATPases
(6, 7), type II (8) on actin-like proteins (9), and type III (10–12)
on tubulin/FtsZ-like proteins (13, 14). Although the structure of
the ﬁlament implicated in segregation has been determined for
all three systems (9, 14–16), only examples of type I and II
centromeric complexes have so far been resolved (17–19).
The centromeric complex of the type II (actin-like) ParMRC
plasmid partitioning system is formed by the binding of adapter
protein ParR to parC, a series of parallel (direct), 11-base pair
(bp) repeats (20). The superstructure this complex forms is helical,
right-handed, and places the parC DNA on the exterior of the
helix and ParR on the interior (18, 19). This arrangement clusters
the interaction surfaces between ParM and ParR, which are located at the tip of the ParM ﬁlament and within the last few
residues of ParR (18, 19). This clustering probably enables processive ﬁlament tip tracking by promoting binding between the
ﬁlament end and the RC helix, ensuring that only parC-bound
ParR is able to seed and grow, or at least stabilize ﬁlaments.
The centromeric complex of the type III (tubulin-like) TubZRC
plasmid partitioning system is also composed of an adapter, TubR,
and a DNA centromere, tubC. The rough disposition of four of the
repeats making up Bacillus thuringiensis serovar israelensis pBtoxis
16522–16527 | PNAS | October 9, 2012 | vol. 109 | no. 41

(Bt) tubC, but not the TubR binding site or register, has been
assigned by Tang and colleagues who demonstrated binding by
Bt TubR to this region of pBtoxis (10, 21). Furthermore, the
structure of the TubR adapter protein has been determined in
the absence of DNA (13), revealing that it forms a recognitionhelix dimer with a potential DNA binding surface and demonstrating that it is unrelated to type II ParR (18, 19). Finally, it
has been shown that the TubRC complex is capable of recruiting
TubZ (13, 21). A summary of previous work on the TubZRC
system is provided in Table S1.
In this study we examine in detail the superstructures formed
by TubRC complexes. We show that Bt tubC in fact contains
seven high-afﬁnity binding sites, the full region being required
for proper in vitro activity. Furthermore we reveal that TubR
coats tubC: the centromeric complex of TubZRC plasmid partitioning systems therefore takes the form of a DNA–protein
ﬁlament. We present a 7.0-Å crystal structure revealing the superstructure of the ﬂexible Bt TubRC ﬁlament and provide
electron microscopy and a 3.5-Å crystal structure that imply
a preferred conformation for the TubRC ﬁlament of Bacillus
megaterium (Bm), allowing us to compare the superstructures of
type III (tubulin-like) centromeric complexes to those of type II
(actin-like) plasmid partitioning systems.
Results
Bt tubC Dissected by Microarray. We initially set out to precisely
deﬁne B. thuringiensis (Bt) tubC. The structure of the centromere
is deﬁned by the binding of its protein partner; therefore, we
dissected the binding of Bt TubR to each independent site within
this part of pBtoxis. We designed a microarray in which each experimental measurement consisted of a 24-bp double-stranded
DNA sequence (Fig. 1B), formed by a hairpin stabilized through
a tetraloop (22). This 24-base “window” was scanned through the
plasmid in successive measurements; a 4-bp shift per measurement
was used to conduct a coarse scan of a large area of pBtoxis, and
single base pair shifts were then used for a high-resolution scan of
the Bt tubC region (Fig. 1 B and C). Bt TubR bound the array in
only a few places, and binding was sustained reproducibly with the
movement of the experimental window. The Bt tubC region was
readily identiﬁed as the sole site of strong, sustained binding.
Bt TubR Binds to tubC Cooperatively. Peaks of binding by Bt TubR
were clearly identiﬁable (Fig. 1C). Fourier analysis of this signal
with respect to sequence conﬁrmed the repeat length to be between 12 and 13 bp (Fig. S1) (10). We aligned the sequences
producing peak signal allowing for a 12-bp repeat and produced
a weighted consensus sequence of the repeats found in Bt tubC
(Figs. S1 and S2). Two directly repeated sequences were required to produce each peak, troughs in binding occurring

Author contributions: C.H.S.A. and J.L. designed research; C.H.S.A. performed research;
C.H.S.A. and J.L. analyzed data; and C.H.S.A. and J.L. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Data deposition: The atomic coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the
Protein Data Bank, www.pdb.org (PDB ID codes 4ASN, 4ASO, and 4ASS).
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: jyl@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1210899109/-/DCSupplemental.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1210899109

greatest width of a single TubR dimer, whereas the separation of
the subunits (from Fourier transform) was 4–5 nm, suggesting
that a single ﬁber of Bt tubC DNA was bound by a single row of
TubR dimers. The ﬁlaments were typically extended, although
some exhibited a higher degree of curvature, indicating that
these complexes are ﬂexible.

on centering of a single binding site (Fig. 1C and Fig. S2),
implying that Bt TubR binding is highly cooperative, dependent on lateral stabilization. This mechanism is consistent
with the known activity of TubR as a repressor (12), providing
a mechanism by which afﬁnity may be tuned. Stronger sites
(such as sites 1, 3, and 4) were capable of supporting binding on
adjacent DNA, indicated by low signal peaks in the absence of
adjacent cognate sites, implying that spreading of Bt TubR
along the plasmid is possible (Fig. 1C). We conﬁrmed that such
lateral spreading occurs in vitro by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (Fig. S3).
Bt tubC Is Seven TubR Binding Sites in Two Clusters. Bt TubR binding
was limited almost exclusively to the region of DNA 3′ from tubR.
Whereas four direct repeats have previously been identiﬁed (21)
we found that there are in fact two clusters of Bt TubR binding
sites, the ﬁrst comprising three adjacent sites (sites 1–3) and the
second four (sites 4–7), which together we identify as the native Bt
tubC (Fig. 1C). Each block binds Bt TubR independently in vitro
(Fig. S3). Because the two blocks are separated by 54 bp,
spreading of Bt TubR cannot coat all intervening DNA; however,
it is well established in the case of ParR from Escherichia coli
plasmid R1 that separate blocks of sites are linked by looping of
the intervening DNA, so a single complex may be formed (18, 23).
Evolution has selected for the production of an array of Bt tubCbound TubR dimers; these must presumably therefore be required
to perform the function of the TubRC centromeric complex.
Bt TubRC Forms a DNA–Protein Filament in Vitro. To understand why
Bt tubC had evolved an array of parallel repeats, we examined
the complex formed by Bt TubR on its centromere using electron
microscopy. We produced full-length, untagged Bt TubR and
puriﬁed it to homogeneity (Fig. 2A); it was then bound to a PCR
product encompassing the full Bt tubC region. DNA–protein
ﬁlaments composed of blocky subunits were clearly visible in
samples of the Bt TubRC complex (Fig. 2B). Bt TubRC ﬁlaments
had an average width measuring 5–6 nm, consistent with the
Aylett and Löwe

Bt TubRC Crystals Contain a DNA–Protein Filament. Bt TubRC24
forms an extended DNA–protein ﬁlament in our crystals. The
DNA component, tubC24, describes a continuous linear ﬁber,
curving in a slight right-handed superhelix, which forms the core of
the complex. The outside of the ﬁlament is decorated with TubR
molecules, forming an 8/1 helix with a rise of 38.4 Å, corresponding exactly to the 12-bp cognate repeat found in Bt tubC
(Fig. 2 C and D). The coating of the outside of the DNA helix by
Bt TubR enables the majority of crystal contacts to be formed
between protein side chains rather than by DNA, as is expected
because of the highly charged nature of the phosphate backbone.
The Bt TubRC24 ﬁlament has very similar dimensions to the extended ﬁlaments observed by electron microscopy, and we conclude that this structure is representative of the predominant state
of Bt TubRC in solution.
DNA Binding by Bt TubR. Bt TubR bound predominantly within the
major groove of tubC. The N termini of the paired “recognition”
helices together protrude deep into the major groove where they
are able to make contact with 5 bp. This is the only major groove
contact made, and it is therefore likely to correspond to the sequence-speciﬁc component of Bt tubC. The consensus binding sequence GTTTAA is not a simple twofold however, suggesting that
DNA conformation must also play a role. On either side of the
major groove binding site, the phosphate backbone descends into
a cleft between the short helix and loop N-terminal to the recognition helix and the β-hairpin of Bt TubR. The negative charge of
the phosphates will be complemented by lysines 43, 54, and 79, and
arginine 74, which form the sides and base of this cleft. Finally, the
tip of the β-hairpin protrudes toward the minor groove where arginine 77, which clashes with the phosphate backbone after rigid
body reﬁnement, must intrude into the groove itself (Fig. 2E).
Currently, only one other structure of a recognition helix
dimerized form of the winged helix-turn-helix fold bound to DNA
is available, that of FadR from E. coli (24). The DNA binding
mode is conserved between the two structures, although the minor
groove binding β-hairpin is positioned slightly differently in FadR.
The conformation of the DNA in the two structures deviates
substantially, however. Both proteins extend the DNA helix relative to its conformation in standard B-DNA; however in the case
of FadR, the DNA is bound closely within the minor grooves,
bending the course of the ﬁber toward the surface of the protein,
whereas Bt TubR binds less closely in the minor groove, the DNA
bending slightly away from the protein. The minor groove is also
elongated, possibly due to the interaction with the β-hairpin. The
full length of DNA contacted by a single Bt TubR dimer is 16 bp,
PNAS | October 9, 2012 | vol. 109 | no. 41 | 16523

BIOCHEMISTRY

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Fig. 1. Bt tubC is composed of seven repeats, which bind TubR in a cooperative fashion. (A) Schematic comparing the tubZRC loci of Bt pBtoxis and
Bm pBM400. (B) Illustration of the DNA hairpins produced on a microarray to
sample the sequence of pBtoxis, and a schematic indicating how this window
was scanned through a region of the plasmid sequence by successive single
base pair movements. The variable window is shown in cyan, and all other
base pairs in black. (C) Plot of the recorded signal for each microarray spot in
a 1-bp scan over the region of Bt tubC (bp 126688 to 126496). Each point is
plotted over the 12th bp of the 24-bp hairpin, with the sequence shown below. The assigned binding sites for Bt TubR are shown above, and the corresponding sequences are colored magenta below. The site(s) resulting in each
peak have been annotated above the graph.

Structure of Bt TubRC at 7 Å. Unfortunately the Bt TubRC DNA–
protein ﬁlaments were not sufﬁciently ordered for either helical or
single-particle reconstruction; therefore, we obtained a higher
resolution model by cocrystallizing Bt TubR with oligonucleotides
from tubC. Cocrystals were obtained with Bt TubR and a 24-bp
double-stranded oligonucleotide (tubC24). Diffraction was recorded to 7 Å. The structure shown in Fig. 2 C–E was solved by
molecular replacement using PDB ID code 3M9A and B-form
DNA (13) and veriﬁed by phasing selenium anomalous differences to conﬁrm that the difference density obtained identiﬁed
the selenomethionine sites (Fig. S4 and Table S2). Bt TubRC24
crystals were of space group C2, each asymmetric unit containing
eight Bt TubR dimers and four tubC24 oligonucleotides. Electron
density was surprisingly good (Fig. S4) and the positions after rigid
body reﬁnement resulted in close contacts but few clashes, implying a reasonable model; however, determination of the register
of the DNA sequence lay beyond the resolution of our data.

A

B

C

90 Å

40
30
20
Bt TubR

D
300 Å

DNA shared between
two TubR dimers
TubZ 90º Light
Scattering (%)

E

100

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

50

Minor
groove
binding
hairpin

Major groove
binding site

GTPγS
TubRC PCR
TubRC plasmid
TubRC 4 sites
TubRC 2 sites
Bt tubC alone

Bt TubR / tubC

GTP or GTPγS

16 bp

F

0
0

600

900

although the tubC repeat length is 12 bp (13). This requires 4 bp to
be shared between adjacent dimers, which occurs at the site of
protein–protein contact between the minor groove binding hairpins (Fig. 2 C–E). These β-hairpins from adjacent Bt TubR dimers
are tightly paired in the minor groove, their opposition favoring
the DNA curvature in the Bt TubRC24 structure.
TubRC Stabilizes TubZ Polymerization in Vitro. To conﬁrm that the
TubRC complex we had discovered was relevant to the activity of
the TubZRC plasmid partitioning system, we assayed its effect
on TubZ polymerization by 90° light scattering. A recent study by
Oliva and colleagues (25) has shown that TubRC increases polymerization of TubZ. We therefore mixed Bt TubZ with GTP
below the critical point of ﬁlament formation measurable by light
scattering. Bt TubRC complex was then added, which stabilized
ﬁlament growth. A similar effect, with the same maximum polymerization, can be produced by replacing GTP with GTPγS,
implying that the bar to growth is due to hydrolysis of the nucleotide and disassembly of the ﬁlament at a higher rate than
growth (Fig. 2F). Given that the Bt TubRC complex was present
at a substoichiometric level, this suggests that it might prevent
depolymerization of TubZ ﬁlaments, possibly switching from
treadmilling to elongation.
To determine whether or not the whole Bt TubRC complex is
required for the action of the system, we performed the assay
with Bt tubC containing plasmid and with linear DNA representing full-length tubC, four repeats (sites 4–7) and two repeats
(sites 6 and 7). These Bt TubRC complexes were compared at
a constant concentration of TubR binding sites. Bt TubRC
complexes bearing only two repeats did not have any measurable
effect on TubZ polymerization below stoichiometric levels,
whereas both linear DNA and plasmid containing Bt tubC
16524 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1210899109

1800 (s)

Fig. 2. Bt TubR bound to tubC forms a DNA–protein
ﬁlament that effects TubZ polymerization. (A) Coomassie-stained SDS/PAGE of puriﬁed Bt TubR. (B) Electron micrographs of negatively stained (Left) and rotary
shadowed (Right) Bt TubR bound to full-length tubC
showing the morphology of the DNA–protein ﬁlaments
formed. (Scale bars, 10 nm.) (C and D) Crystal structure of
Bt TubR (Cα ribbon representation, the ﬁrst four dimers
are colored by chain, the second four a continuum between blue at the N terminus and red at the C terminus)
bound to two repeats of tubC (stick representation, C in
white/CPK colors). Dimensions in angstroms are shown
alongside the structure, whereas the ﬁlament has been
rotated by 90° between the two plates. (E) Single Bt
TubR dimer (surface charge representation, red negative,
blue positive) from the structure, with B-DNA [ball and
stick representation, C in white/Corey, Pauling, Koltun
(CPK) coloring] extended from the 12-bp section used in
reﬁnement in order to show the interaction with the full
16-bp region covered by the dimer. (F) Effect of Bt TubRC
on the polymerization of TubZ measured using 90° light
scattering. GTP or GTPγS was added to all reactions at
200 s, and the complexes indicated to the Right of the
graph were added at 600 s (color coded). The four- and
two-site versions of Bt tubC encompassed binding sites 4–
7 and 6–7.

showed a similar substoichiometric effect. The four-repeat long
Bt TubRC complex affected polymerization; however, this effect
was substantially reduced relative to full-length tubC, requiring
four times as much complex to match polymerization (Fig. 2F).
TubR from a tubZR Operon in pBM400. Having deﬁned tubC in the
Bt TubZRC plasmid partitioning system and shown that Bt
TubRC forms a ﬂexible DNA–protein ﬁlament, the full length of
which is required to match native in vitro efﬁcacy, we moved on
to consider whether or not there might be a preferred structural
mode that the TubRC complex might take up, given that the
ﬂexible TubRC complex must presumably become ordered upon
binding to the TubZ ﬁlament, which might explain the requirement
for the length of tubC.
Fortuitously, in the course of our investigation of TubZRC
plasmid partitioning systems we discovered an additional TubR
homolog that adopts a more consistent preferred conformation
as a DNA–protein complex, shedding light on this question. Bm
TubR (UniProt Q848W2_BACMQ) lies within an operon containing a TubZ homolog in B. megaterium QM B1551 (Bm)
plasmid pBM400 (Fig. S5). The gene encoding this TubR was
synthesized and we overexpressed and puriﬁed the full-length
protein without any tags or additions (Fig. 3A).
Bm TubR Forms Ring-Like DNA–Protein Filaments. To determine
whether or not the Bm and Bt TubR–DNA complexes were
comparable, we imaged the Bm TubR–DNA complex by electron microscopy. Whereas Bm TubR binds its intergenic DNA 5′
to tubZR with a slight preference over Bt tubC (Fig. S3), we were
unable to identify the exact Bm TubR binding sites by microarray
(its structure suggests an explanation for this). Electron microscopy of Bm TubR bound to DNA revealed DNA–protein
Aylett and Löwe

A

40

B

D

30
20
Bm TubR
β-hairpin

C

F

“recognition” helices

G

major

H

I

minor
40

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Å

ﬁlaments (Fig. 3D), the dimensions of which were similar to
those recorded for Bt TubRC (Bm TubR formed identical DNA–
protein ﬁlaments on intergenic, Bt tubC, and bulk DNA; tubC
DNA was used here to allow direct comparison). The Bm TubR–
DNA ﬁlament width averaged between 5 and 6 nm, and in
general the ﬁlaments seemed similar in structure. In a notable
contrast to the lack of a consistent preferred curvature by the Bt
TubRC complex, however, although Bm TubR–DNA still produced relatively ﬂexible ﬁlaments, they more often favored
highly curved ring-like structures, with a typical diameter of 15–
20 nm, mean 17.5, n = 43 (Fig. 3D). Bm TubR–DNA ﬁlaments
adopted ring-like structures (deﬁned as less than 15 nm separation between the tips of each end of the ﬁlament) and poorly
ordered ﬁlaments in a ratio of 73.6:26.4 (n = 253), in contrast to
Bt TubRC, for which the ratio was 10.7:89.3 (n = 242).
Bm TubR Is Structurally Homologous to Bt TubR. To aid our understanding of Bm TubR, we crystallized the protein and recorded
diffraction to 3.5 Å. The crystal structure was then solved by
selenomethionine single anomalous dispersion (SeMet SAD). Bm
TubR crystallized in space group H32, the asymmetric unit containing three protein molecules (Table S2). Bm TubR shares the
Aylett and Löwe

Fig. 3. Bm TubR forms helices of similar appearance in
crystals and bound to DNA. (A) Coomassie-stained SDS/
PAGE of puriﬁed Bm TubR. (B) Structural superimposition
of monomers of Bt and Bm TubR (Cα ribbon representation, colored as indicated). (C) Structural superimposition
of dimers of Bt and Bm TubR (Cα ribbon representation,
colored as indicated). (D) Electron micrographs of negatively stained Bm TubR bound to Bt tubC DNA. (Scale bars,
10 nm.) (E and F) Crystal structure of Bm TubR helix (Cα
ribbon representation, continuum between blue at the N
terminus and red at the C terminus). Dimensions in angstroms are shown alongside the structure, whereas the
helix has been rotated by 90° between the two plates. (G–
I) Four Bm TubR dimers (surface charge representation,
red negative, blue positive) with the DNA from Protein
Data Bank (PDB) ID code 1HW2 (stick representation, C in
yellow or magenta/CPK colors) shown after the two
structures have been superimposed for the two central
dimers. The two plates are rotated by 90° relative to one
another. (H) Surface charge representation of the Bm
TubR helix (red negative, blue positive).

same fold as Bt TubR, with a single chain backbone rmsd of 2.0 Å
(Fig. 3B). Furthermore the quaternary structure of Bt TubR (13),
in which the dimer is formed by twofold rotation about the recognition helix, is also recapitulated (Fig. 3C). In Bm TubR, the
two monomers making up the dimer are splayed slightly, relative
to those in Bt TubR, leaving a cleft between the recognition helices. Although it appears likely that this ﬁssure may close slightly
during DNA binding, the cleft may explain the observed lack of
a clearly deﬁned binding sequence. Superimposition of the surface
of Bm TubR onto our structure of Bt TubRC shows that this cleft
opens directly beneath the major groove: contacts with the DNA
bases can therefore be expected to be substantially reduced. This
implies that less base speciﬁc, more conformation-dependent minor groove binding may be expected to dominate, and that the
overall protein–DNA contact area would also be considerably
smaller, suggesting that larger numbers of dimers would be required to associate cooperatively for stable binding, whereas our
microarrays cannot accommodate more than two dimers (Fig. S6).
The putative DNA binding surface identiﬁed for Bt TubR is also
conserved between the two proteins, a cluster of lysine and arginine
residues characterizing the same face of the dimer (Fig. 3H) (13).
The minor groove binding β-hairpin in Bm TubR is in a different
PNAS | October 9, 2012 | vol. 109 | no. 41 | 16525

BIOCHEMISTRY

110 Å

E

Bt TubR
Bm TubR

conformation from that in Bt TubR; however, this region has
higher B factors in both cases, and given that it is also slightly
separated from the body of the protein, it may be ﬂexible in vivo.
Bm TubR Helices Externalize the DNA Binding Site. Importantly, the
dimers within the crystal structure of Bm TubR form helical
ﬁlaments (Fig. 3 E and F). The dimensions of these helices are
similar to the Bm TubR–DNA rings visualized by electron microscopy, with a ﬁlament width of 48 Å and a maximum helical
width of 155 Å. The helices place Bm TubR dimers back to back,
allowing the wedge-shaped proteins to make signiﬁcant contacts
with one another. The mean buried interface between pairs of
dimers is 399.5 Å2 in our structure of Bt TubRC, but this
increases to 723.8 Å2 in the case of our structure of Bm TubR.
The extended β-hairpins of adjacent dimers are paired with
a small gap between each dimer, extending the groove between
recognition helices around the entire helix. Signiﬁcantly this
superstructure displays the positively charged DNA binding
surface on the exterior of these helices (Fig. 3H).

Discussion

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Bm TubR Helices Are in Principle Compatible with DNA Wrapping. The

length of DNA used to produce the ring-shaped Bm TubR–DNA
ﬁlaments resolved by electron microscopy is consistent with
DNA wrapping on the external surface. Ring diameter averaged
17.5 nm, implying a circumference of 55 nm, whereas the
expected length of the PCR product would be 50 nm. The internal circumference would therefore be too short, whereas the
external diameter would roughly match the expected length.
Given the similarity in the dimensions of the Bm TubR–DNA
rings, and the crystallographic helix, the most parsimonious explanation is that these structures are similar. If we assume that
the DNA binding mode of Bm TubR is identical to that of Bt
TubR, given their structural similarity, then superimposing the
available structures of this class of DNA binding proteins (Bt
TubRC/FadR–DNA) onto the structure of the Bm TubR helix
will describe the path of the DNA. When this is carried out, it is
clear that, although the surface is not immediately compatible
with a continuous strand of DNA, only a relatively small distance
(6.1 Å, Bt TubRC/3.4 Å, FadR–DNA) would separate the DNA
backbones from adjacent dimers. FadR–DNA better matches
the curve of the Bm TubR helix as the DNA from this structure
curves in the same direction. Closer pairing of the minor groove
binding β-hairpins would be required to bind DNA, which might
be achieved through closure of the notch in the surface of Bm
TubR or a slight rotation of the helix (Fig. 3 G–I and Fig. S7).
TubRC Is a DNA–Protein Filament. Our results conclusively show that

the centromeric complex of TubZRC plasmid partitioning systems
forms a DNA–protein ﬁlament. The disposition of tubC has
evolved to facilitate its formation, ensuring coverage of a minimum length of plasmid DNA; furthermore, the binding mechanism of TubR is highly cooperative, allowing coating, further
favoring its formation. We have shown that such a ﬁlament is
required for the activity of TubR upon TubZ polymerization in
vitro, activity falling to nil as the length of the centromeric complex decreases, even though the total concentration of TubR–
DNA binding pairs was held constant. It is clear, therefore, that
a TubRC ﬁlament is essential for the activity of the centromeric
complex. Why must this be the case?
Interaction with the centromeric complex must stabilize the
assembly of its cognate ﬁlament, whereas the free adapter protein must be incapable of this activity. The formation of the
complex must therefore either produce a novel binding site between its components with substantially higher afﬁnity or cluster
the adapter protein in space to achieve binding to the ﬁlament
through higher avidity. In both the ParMRC and TubZRC
plasmid partitioning systems, it would seem that the second
mechanism appears to have won out over the ﬁrst. This may well
occur because this mechanism can take advantage of both the
clustering of the adapter protein on an array of DNA binding
16526 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1210899109

sites and clustering of the subunits within the cognate protein
ﬁlament. Because the superstructure of a linear ﬁlament of
identical subunits consists of a repeated vector, it must form
a helix of tighter or looser curvature. Close clustering in space by
a linear ﬁlament will therefore, by deﬁnition, be achieved
through the formation of tight helical structures.
Although different TubZRC systems have so far been observed
to have considerable similarity (25, 26), our Bt and Bm TubR
complexes exhibit different curvatures. Bt TubRC crystallized as
an extended DNA–protein ﬁlament with protein wrapping helically around the outside of the DNA, whereas the Bm TubR–
DNA complex appears to form a ring or short helix with external
DNA. Whereas it is possible that the two TubRC structures represent entirely diverged forms of the adapter complex, we think
this unlikely; the Bt TubRC ﬁlament was clearly quite ﬂexible in
vitro, and it is in fact possible to reconcile the two structures as
“ﬂexible” and “curled” modes of a similar complex. The 12-bp
repeat between major groove binding sites in the Bt TubRC ﬁlament is approximately conserved when DNA is superimposed
upon the Bm TubR helix, so the binding periodicity would be
similar (11–13 bp). The main structural change in DNA binding
between the two would be rearrangement of the minor groove
binding β-hairpins. These are roughly paired in both structures;
however, the difference being that their orientation is reversed,
providing a convenient switch between the two states. This proposed closure would neatly wrap the DNA and close up the space
between adjacent TubR dimers (Fig. 4 A and B and Fig. S7).
Why then would the two DNA–protein ﬁlaments have different curvatures in vitro? One possible cause could be that binding

A

B
Proposed Model
Bm TubR-DNA

Proposed
topological
rearrangement

Crystal Structure
Bt TubR-tubC

C

D

Centromere
parC

Filament
parM

Adaptor
parR

Centromere Adaptor
tubC
tubR

Filament
tubZ

Linear centromeric repeats
First block Second block

Linear centromeric repeats
First block Second block

R1 parC

Bt tubC

R1 ParR
Adaptor helix

R1 ParM
Double-helical filament

Bt TubZ
Double-helical filament

Bm TubR
Adaptor helix

Fig. 4. Bm TubR helix suggests further convergent evolution of type II and
III partitioning systems. (A) Structure of Bt TubR (Cα ribbon representation,
blue at N terminus, red at C terminus) bound to tubC (stick representation, C
in white/CPK colors). (B) Structure of Bm TubR (Cα ribbon representation,
blue at N terminus, red at C terminus) shown with the DNA (stick representation, C in white/CPK colors) from PDB ID code 1HW2 after superimposition of the protein chains. (C and D) Comparison of operon structure (3, 10,
12), centromeric structure (20, 21), ﬁlament superstructure (9, 14, 16), and
adapter complex superstructure (18, 19, this study) for the (actin-like)
ParMRC and (tubulin-like) TubZRC plasmid partitioning systems.

Aylett and Löwe

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 108.172.119.208 on July 24, 2022 from IP address 108.172.119.208.

Convergent Evolution of Type II and III Centromeric Complexes? It
has not escaped our notice that an intriguing parallel emerges
from this work. The structure of Bt tubC is strongly reminiscent of
that of R1 parC, both consisting of two series of linear repeats
separated by a linker, whereas the ring-like structure of Bm TubR
is similar in superstructure to the known ParRC complex (Fig.
4C). This similarity adds to our earlier ﬁnding that TubZ, being
tubulin related, forms actin- (and ParM)-like double helical ﬁlaments that are the smallest closed-symmetrical polymers possible
and seem exquisitely tailored to the plasmid segregation task at
hand (14). The observation of such similar superstructures,
1. Gerdes K, Howard M, Szardenings F (2010) Pushing and pulling in prokaryotic DNA
segregation. Cell 141:927–942.
2. Salje J (2010) Plasmid segregation: How to survive as an extra piece of DNA. Crit Rev
Biochem Mol Biol 45:296–317.
3. Gerdes K, Møller-Jensen J, Bugge Jensen R (2000) Plasmid and chromosome partitioning: Surprises from phylogeny. Mol Microbiol 37:455–466.
4. Austin S, Abeles A (1983) Partition of unit-copy miniplasmids to daughter cells. II. The
partition region of miniplasmid P1 encodes an essential protein and a centromere-like
site at which it acts. J Mol Biol 169:373–387.
5. Ogura T, Hiraga S (1983) Partition mechanism of F plasmid: Two plasmid gene-encoded products and a cis-acting region are involved in partition. Cell 32:351–360.
6. Leonard TA, Butler PJ, Löwe J (2005) Bacterial chromosome segregation: Structure
and DNA binding of the Soj dimer—a conserved biological switch. EMBO J 24:
270–282.
7. Barillà D, Carmelo E, Hayes F (2007) The tail of the ParG DNA segregation protein
remodels ParF polymers and enhances ATP hydrolysis via an arginine ﬁnger-like motif.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:1811–1816.
8. Gerdes K, Larsen JE, Molin S (1985) Stable inheritance of plasmid R1 requires two
different loci. J Bacteriol 161:292–298.
9. van den Ent F, Møller-Jensen J, Amos LA, Gerdes K, Löwe J (2002) F-actin-like ﬁlaments formed by plasmid segregation protein ParM. EMBO J 21:6935–6943.
10. Tang M, Bideshi DK, Park HW, Federici BA (2006) Minireplicon from pBtoxis of Bacillus
thuringiensis subsp. israelensis. Appl Environ Microbiol 72:6948–6954.
11. Tinsley E, Khan SA (2006) A novel FtsZ-like protein is involved in replication of the
anthrax toxin-encoding pXO1 plasmid in Bacillus anthracis. J Bacteriol 188:2829–2835.
12. Larsen RA, et al. (2007) Treadmilling of a prokaryotic tubulin-like protein, TubZ, required for plasmid stability in Bacillus thuringiensis. Genes Dev 21:1340–1352.
13. Ni L, Xu W, Kumaraswami M, Schumacher MA (2010) Plasmid protein TubR uses
a distinct mode of HTH-DNA binding and recruits the prokaryotic tubulin homolog
TubZ to effect DNA partition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:11763–11768.

Aylett and Löwe

produced to perform similar functions by entirely unrelated
proteins in different systems, suggests that convergent evolution
may have taken place, driving both systems toward the same solution to the problem of binding a cytomotive ﬁlament, with entirely different protein and DNA building blocks.
Materials and Methods
Detailed information is provided in SI Materials and Methods. Brieﬂy, all
proteins were produced in E. coli and puriﬁed by chromatography; DNA was
either synthesized (Bt tubC24), produced by PCR (all other linear DNA), or
puriﬁed as a plasmid (ptubC); the Bt tubC aptamer microarray experiment was
performed in conjunction with LC Sciences; electron microscopy was carried
out using a 2% (wt/vol) uranyl acetate negative stain in an FEI T12 electron
microscope; the sequence of Bt tubC24 was TTTAAGTTTAACTTTCAGTTTACA;
Bt TubRC24 crystals were solved at 7 Å by molecular replacement and conﬁrmed by selenomethionine SAD, whereas Bm TubR crystals were solved at 3.5
Å by selenomethionine SAD; 90° light scattering was carried out at 400 nm
using 1.25 μM Bt TubZ, 500 nM TubR, and 125 nM of TubR binding sites in each
tubC DNA, except for tubC repeats 4–7, where the concentration was doubled
to make the difference from tubC24 clearly visible.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Rachel Larsen, Joseph Pogliano (both
University of California at San Diego), and Katherine Michie [Medical
Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology (MRC-LMB)] for providing
materials; Sebastian Eustermann (MRC-LMB) for his tetraloop sequence;
Fabrice Gorrec and Sonja Kuhlman for their help at MRC-LMB crystallization
facility; Chen Shaoxia, Qing Wang, and Colin Palmer for their aid with
electron microscopy at MRC-LMB; Sonja Dunbar for summer work and
Ramona Duman (both MRC-LMB) for help at the European Synchrotron
Radiation Facility (ESRF); and LC Sciences, the ESRF, and Diamond Light
Source for their excellent service and support. This work was supported by
Medical Research Council Grant U105184326.

14. Aylett CHS, Wang Q, Michie KA, Amos LA, Löwe J (2010) Filament structure of bacterial tubulin homologue TubZ. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:19766–19771.
15. Hui MP, et al. (2010) ParA2, a Vibrio cholerae chromosome partitioning protein, forms
left-handed helical ﬁlaments on DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:4590–4595.
16. Orlova A, et al. (2007) The structure of bacterial ParM ﬁlaments. Nat Struct Mol Biol
14:921–926.
17. Schumacher MA, Funnell BE (2005) Structures of ParB bound to DNA reveal mechanism of partition complex formation. Nature 438:516–519.
18. Møller-Jensen J, Ringgaard S, Mercogliano CP, Gerdes K, Löwe J (2007) Structural
analysis of the ParR/parC plasmid partition complex. EMBO J 26:4413–4422.
19. Schumacher MA, et al. (2007) Segrosome structure revealed by a complex of ParR
with centromere DNA. Nature 450:1268–1271.
20. Dam M, Gerdes K (1994) Partitioning of plasmid R1. Ten direct repeats ﬂanking the
parA promoter constitute a centromere-like partition site parC, that expresses incompatibility. J Mol Biol 236:1289–1298.
21. Tang M, Bideshi DK, Park HW, Federici BA (2007) Iteron-binding ORF157 and FtsZ-like
ORF156 proteins encoded by pBtoxis play a role in its replication in Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis. J Bacteriol 189:8053–8058.
22. Eustermann S, et al. (2011) The DNA-binding domain of human PARP-1 interacts with
DNA single-strand breaks as a monomer through its second zinc ﬁnger. J Mol Biol 407:
149–170.
23. Salje J, Löwe J (2008) Bacterial actin: Architecture of the ParMRC plasmid DNA partitioning complex. EMBO J 27:2230–2238.
24. Xu Y, Heath RJ, Li Z, Rock CO, White SW (2001) The FadR.DNA complex. Transcriptional control of fatty acid metabolism in Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 276:
17373–17379.
25. Oliva MA, Martin-Galiano AJ, Sakaguchi Y, Andreu JM (2012) Tubulin homolog TubZ
in a phage-encoded partition system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:7711–7716.
26. Chen Y, Erickson HP (2008) In vitro assembly studies of FtsZ/tubulin-like proteins
(TubZ) from Bacillus plasmids: Evidence for a capping mechanism. J Biol Chem 283:
8102–8109.

PNAS | October 9, 2012 | vol. 109 | no. 41 | 16527

BIOCHEMISTRY

to the TubZ ﬁlament is required to stabilize the TubRC complex
in one state or another. It seems quite plausible that interactions
with the linear ﬁlament stabilize the relatively ﬂexible structure
of the TubRC centromeric complex. The internally clustered
TubR dimers in a ring-like structure would seem more capable of
making a protein–protein contact than the sparsely distributed
dimers in the ﬂexible, extended form, as this form does not
present TubR on a consistent side of the ﬁlament. The internal
diameter of the Bm TubR crystal structure, at ∼6.5 nm, is smaller
than the diameter of the TubZ ﬁlament (14), at ∼10 nm; however, the rings observed by electron microscopy exhibit internal
diameters between 5 and 10 nm, allowing sufﬁcient ﬂexibility to
encompass TubZ ﬁlaments in theory. A switch between a ﬂexible
and a ring-like form might allow the TubRC complex to clamp
onto a growing TubZ ﬁlament during partitioning. Further
structural studies of the TubZRC system will be required to
understand the mechanism of binding and it is worth mentioning
that the interaction sites between TubZ and TubR currently
remain unknown.

